docs-site/docs/reference/session.md, before:

# Reference: Session

`Session` is a DataFusion-backed SQL session. It supports registering multiple tables and running
SQL queries that return `pyarrow.Table`.

## SQL result export mode

`Session.sql(...)` exports Arrow results to Python in one of two ways:

- Arrow C Data Interface (C Stream) when supported (preferred; avoids IPC serialization + large bytes copies)
- Arrow IPC stream as a fallback

The C Stream exporter supports common nested Arrow types like `List`, `Struct`, and `Map`.
Some edge-case-heavy types (e.g. `Union`, `ListView`) are not enabled yet: `auto` mode falls back to IPC, and
`c_stream` mode errors.

You can control the behavior via environment variables (set before calling `Session.sql(...)`):

- `TTF_SQL_EXPORT_MODE=auto|ipc|c_stream` (default: `auto`)
  - `auto`: try C Stream, fall back to IPC if C Stream export/import fails
  - `ipc`: force IPC
  - `c_stream`: force C Stream (no IPC fallback; errors propagate)
- `TTF_SQL_EXPORT_DEBUG=1` to emit a debug warning when `auto` falls back from C Stream → IPC

::: timeseries_table_format.Session
    options:
      members: true
      show_source: false

Commit message:

feat: update default SQL export mode to C Stream and add environment variable for auto rerun fallback

docs-site/docs/reference/session.md, after:

# Reference: Session

`Session` is a DataFusion-backed SQL session. It supports registering multiple tables and running
SQL queries that return `pyarrow.Table`.

## SQL result export mode

`Session.sql(...)` exports Arrow results to Python in one of two ways:

- Arrow C Data Interface (C Stream) when supported (preferred; avoids IPC serialization + large bytes copies)
- Arrow IPC stream as a fallback

The C Stream exporter supports common nested Arrow types like `List`, `Struct`, and `Map`.
Some edge-case-heavy types (e.g. `Union`, `ListView`) are not enabled yet: `auto` mode falls back to IPC, and
`c_stream` mode errors.

You can control the behavior via environment variables (set before calling `Session.sql(...)`):

- `TTF_SQL_EXPORT_MODE=auto|ipc|c_stream` (default: `c_stream`)
  - `auto`: try C Stream, fall back to IPC if C Stream export/import fails
  - `ipc`: force IPC
  - `c_stream`: force C Stream (no IPC fallback; errors propagate)
- `TTF_SQL_EXPORT_DEBUG=1` to emit a debug warning when `auto` falls back from C Stream → IPC
- `TTF_SQL_EXPORT_AUTO_RERUN_FALLBACK=1` to re-run the query when C Stream fails in `auto` mode (avoids cloning the collected batches, but may change results for non-deterministic queries)

::: timeseries_table_format.Session
    options:
      members: true
      show_source: false
